---
---

[home](home.html)

# Executive Summary

Within the context of environmental policy, a prominent issue is the gap between decision makers and science (Creed, Cormier, et al., 2016). To close this gap it is necessary to have a tool or method to see connections, trade-offs, and gaps of a policy and management framework in regard to an environmental risk (Creed, Cormier, et al., 2016). The Bowtie Risk Assessment Tool visualizes this framework by creating pressure-risk-pathways, which may help identify gaps or weaknesses in the framework (Cormier, Elliott, & Kannen, 2018).

The tool has been used predominantly in the Petroleum industry but is beginning to be applied within environmental contexts (Cormier, Elliott, & Rice, 2019). This report aims to apply the tool to an environmental case study in a Saskatchewan community, specifically the changing water flow regime in Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. Cumberland House is found on the Saskatchewan River Delta and has two distinct communities, the Northern Village of Cumberland House and Cumberland House Cree Nation (Irland, 2017). Over the past few decades, community members have noticed changes in quantity and timing of flow (E. J. Andrews, Reed, Jardine, & Steelman, 2018). The objectives of this report are to visualize the policy and management framework, identify the pressures on flow regime and the resultant impacts, and determine possible gaps in the framework.

Through discussing with academic experts at the University of Saskatchewan and researching publicly available documents: pressures and impacts related to a changing flow regime were determined, as well as the relevant legislated policies and unlegislated management plans. By placing all information in the BowtieXP software, the tool created a visual map of the management framework in place to be analysed.

It was determined that pressures on water flow regime are the E.B. Campbell Dam through daily hydropeaking (Smith, Morozova, Pérez-Arlucea, & Gibling, 2016a), Gardiner Dam through reduction of spring peaks and increase of winter lows (Saskatchewan Water Security Agency, 2012), and upstream Alberta irrigation through removing large quantities of water in the South Saskatchewan River (Partners for the Saskatchewan River Basin, 2009). Consequences from a changing flow regime include impacts on hydrology, ecology, and the culture of the community. Examples of these impacts include decreased wetland connectivity (Hassanzadeh et al., 2017), fish stranding (DFO, 2019), and difficulty for people to travel on water (Abu & Reed, 2018). The policy and management framework of the flow regime is strongly preventative, with few mitigative barriers. Possible gaps or weaknesses in the framework include the need for more mitigative options, such as a watershed plan and committee for the Saskatchewan River Basin. Other gaps include few flow specific regulations and a lack of environmental impact assessments before dam construction.

Overall, this report concludes that the tool was successfully applied to a hydrology context at a community scale to create a map of the policy and management framework and determine gaps and weaknesses. Further steps and recommendations include a detailed risk analysis to determine the severity of impacts and effectiveness of the barriers in place, as well as a land-use simulation tool to model the effects of changing the policy and management framework.
