---
---

[home](home.html)

# 4.0 Summary of Findings

The utilization of the Bowtie Risk Assessment Tool was successful in creating a visual diagram depicting the policy and management framework of a changing flow regime. The tool allowed the creation of pressure-risk-impact pathways in this framework to determine potential gaps. The tool was helpful in identifying where stakeholders and rights holders
fit in the framework. For example, in the diagram created, stakeholders include Universities with research initiatives, NGO's, federal and provincial government, SaskPower, Water Security Agency, and Cumberland House. The University of Saskatchewan is in the process of researching sediment in the Saskatchewan River Delta by Cumberland House, and the federal government implements a minimum flow requirement on the E.B. Campbell Dam, as examples. Understanding each stakeholder’s role and responsibility may help close the gaps between stakeholders, decision makers, and science, and help ask which questions need to be answered next. This tool also provides a good basis for continuing research, as it depicts the overall image of the structure. This tool could further complement hydrological or sociological studies, to view the framework and the issues before moving further into a detailed analysis using a physical or social science.

The tool also proved to have a few gaps, or restrictions. One use for the tool is to look at trade-offs between the positives of a pressure (such as the beneficial power generated at hydropower stations), and the negative impacts. The tool focuses on the negative impacts; therefore, any positives impacts are not captured in the pathways, making it difficult to see the trade-offs. Additionally, the software limits an escalation factor to be attached to just one barrier. This is limiting in the case of climate change, where it would be best to attach the factor to the pressures themselves, as climate change will likely affect the entire pressure and system, not just one barrier. A further gap is that in visualizing a framework surrounding a specific risk, there will be other risks that need consideration in regard to the impacts. For example, with the impact of a more sedentary lifestyle, flow regime will not be the only risk leading to such a lifestyle, it will also be affected by factors such as social media, television, etc, but will be also influenced by flow regime.

Overall, the case study of flow regime in Cumberland House proved that the Bowtie Risk Assessment Tool can be used in a hydrology context in Saskatchewan at a community scale. This tool allowed for pathways and frameworks to be analyzed to see the larger picture of the issue, and to help reduce the gap between science and decision makers. This case study is an addition to the portfolio of environmental applications, enforcing how this tool should be continued to be used in environmental policy to make informed decisions, and highlight gaps or issues relating to the policy problems.
