---
---

[home](home.html)

# Executive Summary

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stormwater Management Ponds (SWMPs) is a man-made engineered structure that built to mainly receive rainfall and surface water runoff temporarily. The stormwater and other surface water runoff move into SWMPs quickly due to the hard surface like roads and roofs. Along the way, many chemicals and particles will dissolve in the water. During summertime, the algae bloom always happen in SWMPs. Because most of SWMPs are constructed in residential areas, the toxins released by algae may threaten both human and other animals’ health. In this study, both pond water and algae samples were taken biweekly from 4 SWMPs in the City of Edmonton during the ice-free time from 2014 to 2015. Samples were sent to laboratory to identify the species of algae and the amounts of numerous of water quality factors, including Total Phosphorus (TP), Total Particulate Phosphorus (TPP), Total Dissolved Phosphorus (TDP) Soluble Reactive Phosphorus (SRP), Total Nitrogen (TN), Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN), Ammonia (NH~3~), Nitrite + Nitrate (NO~2~^-^ + NO~3~^-^), chlorophyll a (Chl-a), Water Temperature, pH, and Total Suspended Solids (TSS). Weather data were also recorded by weather stations at each pond, including Air Temperature, Wind Speed, Rainfall and Solar Radiation. The total number of 60 algae species were identified, including 9 cyanobacteria. The results showed that all the ponds reached their highest Chl-a levels in the earlier of April, which was about 40 days after the snowmelt events. When the snowmelt events occurred, the concentrations of TP, TN, and TPP have also reached their highest values. The concentrations of Chl-a, P and N species were relatively stable during summertime. In some ponds, the Chl-a levels increased again at the end of summer. There were no obvious correlations between Chl-a and other factors. The cause of the peaks of TSS was probably due to snowmelt. And the peaks of TN and TP were probably caused by the internal loading from sediments. To prove that, the analysis of sediments will be required.
