---
---

[home](home.html)

# Introduction

Ecosystem services are vital for human existence. They contribute to the basic needs of social well-being. Food, water, economic, spiritual, and cultural values are derived from it. Therefore ecosystem management is essential for sustainable and healthy living. Any alteration in its natural function interferes with its ability to produce its goods and services. Located in the central lowlands of Canada is the Saskatchewan River Delta. The delta is a complex inland consisting of numerous potholes and marshlands that support abundant of aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity. It provides a wide range of ecosystem services and economic values which has attracted settlement from both indigenous and non-indigenous population within and outside the Province of Saskatchewan (Goulet and Goulet, 2014; Abu, 2018). For example, Samuel Hearne of the Hudson's Bay Company was a European fur trader who settled in the heart of the delta and established the Cumberland House community in 1774 (Abu, 2018). Thus, the Metis people of Cumberland house is a mixture of the European ancestry. Approximately 100 km Downstream from the E. B. Campbell Dam (EBCD) is the Cumberland House community. It is the oldest settlement in the SRD consisting of the Northern village of Cumberland House (Metis people) and the Cumberland House Cree Nation – an "Indian" reserve (Abu, 2018; Bicentennial Committee of Cumberland House, 1974). The community consists of about 2,200 people (Abu, 2018; Bicentennial Committee of Cumberland House, 1974.). The cultural heritage and livelihood of the community depend primarily on the delta's ecosystem (Abu, 2018; Bicentennial Committee of Cumberland House, 1974).  The delta supports 43 species of mammals, 48 species of fish, and more than 200 species of birds including native species such as moose, beaver, and muskrat (Ducks Unlimited, 2019). Thus, Fishing, hunting, and trapping were cultural activities with economic values and are sources of employment to the community (Abu, 2018; Damas and Smith, 1980; Andrew, 2015). Further, since the foundation of Cumberland House in 1774, the meat and pelts of moose, muskrat, and beaver are traded within and outside the delta (Dorian and Paquin, 2005; Goulet and Goulet, 2014). Thus, the immediate environmental resources are vital to the survival of the community economic, social, and cultural well-being. Ecosystem goods such as Food, medicine, berry, and water are derived from the Delta (Abu, 2018).
 However, the hydrology, and the ecosystem of lakes, wetlands, and marshlands that surrounds the community which forms a substantial part of the delta has been adversely impacted by various upstream developments (Abu, 2018; Andrew, 2015; Brown and Werner, 1969). The creation of artificial reservoirs for hydropower generation and other purposes through the construction of three large dams in the Saskatchewan River basin has resulted to a continuous deterioration of the deltaic ecosystem (Abu, 2018; Andrew, 2015). Construction of the E.B. Campbell Dam in 1966 created the Tobin Lake, Gardiner Dam created in 1967 forms the Lake Diefenbaker, and the Nipawin Hydro Dam constructed in 1985 forms the Codette Lake (Abu, 2018). According to residents of the Cumberland House, the SRD was known for its natural annual summer flood events which is a significant seasonal event in the delta's ecology. It is essential in maintaining its ecosystem functions, health and biodiversity, prevent lakes and stream from drying up, and protect wildlife and fur-bearing animals (Hlady and Price, 1967; Bicentennial Committee 1974; Waldram 1989). However, the maximum released and retaining of water to a minimum flow as needed for the operation of these hydropower dams and other upstream facilities causes alteration in the natural function of the delta (Waldram, 1989; Gober and Wheater, 2014; Andrew, 2015). Changes in the natural flow and flood regimes of the aquatic environment have significant impacts on the ecological status and hydrological processes of downstream freshwater and marine habitats (Liénafa and Martin, 2010; Poff et al., 1997). More so, the deterioration of the delta is accentuated by over-allocation of water in Alberta- increased demand of water for irrigation in Saskatchewan and Alberta, rapid population growth, increased economic development, climate change including the Gardiner dam with its large capacity reservoir (Lake Diefenbaker). The reservoir is the largest artificial freshwater reservoir in the Saskatchewan River basin. It has an area of 500 km squared, a maximum storage capacity of about 9.4×10^9 m^3  and a mean water fluctuation level of 6.3 m. The reservoir was created for irrigation as well as urban water supply, electric power generation, and recreational opportunities. (Hall et al., 1999; heater and Gober, 2013; Gober and Wheater, 2014)
Consequently, there is a continuous interruption of water flow and sediment transport which causes the accumulation of sediments in upstream reservoirs, general decreased of downstream water level, less water inflow, depletion of sediments and nutrient, loss of wetlands and marshlands, reduced connectivity between river and wetlands, declining water quality, changes in vegetation and food web, alteration of the flow regime including threats to native species and sustainable water supply. Thus, the degradation of the natural ecosystem function and impairment of sustainable water supply to the delta including operation of water facilities in the Saskatchewan river basin is alarming (Abu, 2018; Andrew, 2015; Brown and Werner, 1969). Nonetheless, several studies have been conducted on the environmental impacts of dam and reservoir management in Northern America and other continents (Kondoff et al., 2014; Haxton, and Findlay, 2008; O'Conner et al., 2015; Richter et al., 2010; Waldram, 1989; Rosenberg et al., 2000). These studies reviewed that river flow alteration poses significant threats to biodiversity and riverine ecosystem and can harm Deltaic communities' cultural practices (Rosenberg et al., 2000; Richter et al., 2010; Waldram, 1989). According to Meade and Moody (2010), decrease supply of sediments due to trapping by upstream reservoirs have led to a loss of approximately 4800 Km square in the Mississippi River Delta. About 72% of 33 major river deltas are degrading as a result of human disturbances, including climate change (Kondoff et al., 2014). Therefore, numerous ecological, social, and economic concerns have been expressed by residents of the Cumberland Community since the operation of the three large hydropower dams (Waldram, 1989; Andrew, 2015). Loss of local fish species, unpredictable water levels, and flood events, reduced access to harvesting sites, and loss of cultural heritage, traditional livelihood, spiritual values language and identity reflect some of the concerns (Waldram, 1989; Andrew, 2015).
Considering the purpose of reservoirs coupled with the economic limitation and site availability for constructing new ones, the protection of reservoirs from sediment loading and protection of the morphology and ecology of the SRD is essential for sustainable ecosystem management in the Saskatchewan watershed. Therefore, to offer solutions to the continuous degradation of the SRD and the reservoirs, it is crucial to determine the feasibility of discharging the accumulated upstream sediments back into the delta. Sediments play a vital role in the ecological status of the aquatic ecosystem (Feiler et al., 2013). They are sites for significant biochemical processes and are habitats for a wide range of aquatic invertebrate communities (Feiler et al., 2013). However, because of these characteristics, sediments can also act as a sink to environmental contaminants (Brils, 2004; Forstner, 2004). They are a significant source of persistent toxic substances in the aquatic environment (Brils, 2004; Forstner, 2004). Thus, sediment assessment studies are suitable for determining the extent, history, and trend of contamination in water bodies (Feiler et al., 2013). Contaminated sediments can be adequately assessed through the exposure of sediment-dwelling organisms. Therefore, sediment toxicity studies are a significant aspect of environmental risk assessment and water quality assessment (Hoss et al., 2012; Hoss et al., 2010). More so, the quality and extent of contamination including the physical and geochemical properties (e.g., texture and organic content) of sediment differ spatially and temporally across all aquatic environment. Thus, sediment toxicity data are not often archived for future use, and this must be considered when comparing the outcome of sediment toxicity test (Hoss et al., 1999). Sediment toxicity testing involves both biological and physiochemical analysis of sediments. Bioassays (biological sediment toxicity test) assess the effect of sediments on sediment-dwelling organisms. In addition to lethality (i.e., a reduction in survival of organisms), sublethal biological endpoints such as growth and reproduction are often considered. Responses to defined treatments are usually compared with responses to a control or reference sediment (Hoss et al., 2010). Differences in organismal responses to both experimental and control sediment samples may be as a result of sediment's contamination or some inherent properties (Hoss et al., 2012). Thus, it is essential to consider the intrinsic properties of sediment samples when analyzing the outcome of a bioassay toxicity test. (Hoss et al., 2010; Hoss et al., 2012).
A review of a sustainable management option for a continuous and healthy deltaic ecosystem requires a sediment toxicity study to ascertain the feasibility of discharging the accumulated upstream sediment back into the delta for potential restoration. Research has shown the suitability of nematode-Caenorhabditis elegans for biomonitoring and sediment toxicity studies (Giere, 2009; Haegerbaeumer et al., 2017; Beier and Traunspurger, 2001; Brinke et al., 2011; Faupel et al., 2011; Wilson and Kakouli-Duarte, 2009; Traunspurger, 2002; Traunspurger et al., 2006)). Meiofaunal organisms are more suitable in freshwater sediment toxicity study than macrofauna organisms (Hoss et al., 2012; Traunspurger, 2002; Traunspurger et al., 2006). They represent the most abundant benthic community in freshwater sediments and are characterized by a relatively short life cycle. Meiofaunal are 95% burrowers and interstitial dwellers. Hence, they live their entire life cycle in the sediment and are often exposed to anthropogenic disturbances and contaminated sediments throughout their life cycle (Beier and Traunspurger, 2001; Haegerbaeumer et al., unpublished). Meiofaunal  represent organisms located between the micro- and macrofauna in the aquatic food web. Thus, they play an essential role in nutrient cycles (Moens et al., 2006; Majdi et al., 2015). On the other hand, C. elegans are bacterial feeding nematodes mainly found in nutrient-rich freshwater sediment (Hoss et al., 2012). They have a transparent body, are easy to culture, and they are commonly used in physiology and genetic studies (Riddle et al., 1997; Brenner, 1994). Works of Literature reviewed shows the uniqueness and suitability of bacteria feeding nematodes in determining the toxicity effect of chemicals Hoss et al., 2012; Riddle et al., 1997; Brenner, 1994). They have a relatively short life cycle, and respond quickly to toxic substances or anthropogenic disturbances (Traunspurger, 2002; Leung et al., 2008; Hoss et al., 2012). Hence, C. elegans is often used in sediment ecotoxicology study since decades (Hoss and Williams, 2009; Leung et al., 2008).
Further, sediments are characterized by high complex matrix, and many confounding factors increase the data's variability, which may lead to false-negative or false-positive results. Thus, sediment toxicity tests must follow standardized procedures before they can be used as a precise tool in an impact assessment study. However, few guidelines exist in freshwater sediment toxicity test using macroinvertebrate such as the oligochaete Lumbriculus variegatus, the amphipod Hyallela azteca, or the midges Chironomus tentans and Chironomus riparius (American Society for Testing and Materials. 2005; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2004; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2007). These guidelines are limited in Nematodes sediment toxicity testing before the development of the International Standard Organisation guidelines. Hence, the meiofaunal nematode toxicity test was not commonly used in sediment risk assessment study (Hoss et al., 2012; Hering et al., 2004; Haegerbaeumer et al., unpublished). The International Standard Organisation (ISO/FDIS 10872) guidelines provide a concise and suitable protocol for nematode sediment toxicity test using C. elegans. The standard defines the experimental condition and elaborates on the test protocol to ensure a valid, reproducible, and repeatable toxicity test result.


Therefore, to assess the toxicity of sediments accumulated in reservoirs upstream from the delta, this study aim to;

1.	Conduct a biological sediment toxicity test using the nematode-Caenorhabditis elegans.

2.	Conduct metal analyses on upstream sediments .

3.	Analyse sediment texture to review the physiochemical properties of upstream sediments



Include references as appropriate and write down all reference information in the file references.md
