---
---

[home](home.html)

Future steps

To remediate the continuous accumulation of sediment and decrease water inflow into the SRD, it is significant for all stakeholders and rights holders involved in the Cumberland House dilemma to explore the feasibility of different management and potential restoration options that is mutually beneficial. To achieve this, Further research is essential to determine the toxicity of the accumulated sediments upstream from the delta. The toxicity of the sediments to C elegans should be well established by improving on the present study. Assessment of the sediments to other benthic community such as oligochaete Lumbriculus variegatus Hyallela azteca, , the midge Chironomus tentans or Chironomus riparius should be explored and conducted in different laboratories to ensure reliability, validity, repeatability, and reproducibility of results. More so, chemical analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, pesticides, and other persistent organic chemicals should be examined in the sediments to provide complementary information and ensure an integrated assessment of sediment quality.
Further, depending on the toxicity status of the sediment, bioremediation, and management strategies should be considered. It is essential to conduct an impact assessment study to ascertain the best method suitable for discharging the sediments. Thus, a feasibility study of releasing the sediments back to the Delta for potential restoration should be conducted. According to the various works of literature reviewed, sediments Dredging and Flushing through submerged by-pass tunnel are two common, economic and scientifically viable mechanism of returning the sediments into the delta (Sumi et al., 2004; Kondolf et al., 2014; Chapman, 2007; Averett e al., 1990). However, flushing and dredging inevitably distort the aquatic environment and pose a significant risk to humans and marine life. Increasing levels of PCBs and other toxic contaminants have been recorded by various study (Chapman, 2007; Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council, 2014).
Nonetheless, the success of Sediment dredging or flushing is site-specific depending on the nature of the sediments, river bed, slope, hydrology, and other characteristics, including technological and engineering design and human resources (Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council, 2014 Chapman, 2007; Averett e al., 1990). Therefore, concerning discharging the sediments back to the Delta, environmental impact assessment study should be conducted to ascertain the economic and ecological benefit or loss that will be incurred and its impact on all stakeholders and the ecological status of the Delta. Consequently, bathymetric survey and hydrodynamic study, including suitable technological and engineering design study should be conducted to reduce both economic and ecological risk. Further, a review of management policy is also relevant to providing a legal framework for potential management and restoration option. The purpose of the policy analysis should be to provide legal information on possible management and restoration strategy while considering the ecosystem and the economic value of the Saskatchewan River Basin.
Considering the cost-effectiveness of treating contaminated sediments and proximity of the site to the delta, Saskatchewan landing sediment may be inappropriate in replenishing the deplete sediment of the delta. Thus, further effort to improve on this study should focus on sediments from Tobin, Codette, Miry bay, and other upstream sediments
