---
---

[home](home.html)

# Executive Summary

Algae growth has been a reoccurring issue in Canadian lakes, which is increasingly present in nutrient-rich prairies waters. In more recent years, water quality hydrology has gained prominence by concerned citizens. Spring runoff from agricultural fields and possible septic tanks leakage may accelerate the release of nutrients and other contaminants into a lake. However, nutrient monitoring strategies is a significant challenge for small and rural communities due to limited knowledge and lack of resources. This paper reports on the development of nutrient (nitrate and phosphate) monitoring strategies for the improvement of water quality in Jackfish and Murray lakes. The approach will enable the community to manage the lake by acquiring water quality data beneficial scientific evident-based decision making. The developed strategies are capable of monitoring short and long term water quality parameter, including nutrients, pH, metals, ions, and many more based on cost and community objectives. The three recommended approaches highlighted in the report includes long-term baseline monitoring program, an intensive research mass balance approach through consultants, and stewardship-based approach. The health of the lake was analyzed using WQI and Box plot analysis under the long term baseline monitoring approach. The result shows that the WQI rating score falls within the historical baseline rating range of 56-79. A sampling program using nutrient monitoring app was experimented to investigate the feasibility of using the developed approach in the watershed. The paper concludes with a discussion, future research needs regarding environmental challenges and the use of visual representative tools for monitoring and managing eutrophic prairie watersheds.
